---
published: false
---
This blogpost has been generated by ChatGPT as part of an ongoing experiment. See the outline used to generate at the bottom.

Achieving the impossible is something that has always captivated our imaginations. From the first person to break the 4-minute mile to the first person to run a 10-second 100-meter dash, there have been countless examples of people pushing the limits of what was thought to be possible.

Take the 4-minute mile, for example. For years, it was thought to be an impossible barrier that could never be broken. But in 1954, Roger Bannister proved the skeptics wrong by running a mile in just under 4 minutes. And after that, the floodgates opened. In the US alone, the number of people who ran a sub-4-minute mile went from 1 in 1957 to 17 in just the first two months of 2021.

The same pattern can be seen with the 10-second barrier in the 100-meter dash. When Jim Hines broke it in 1968, it was a major milestone. But in the decades that followed, the number of people who ran the 100-meter dash in under 10 seconds continued to grow. In the 1970s, there was just 1 person who achieved this feat. In the 1980s, there were 7. In the 1990s, there were 23. And in 2015, there were 12.

These examples are just a few of the many times that people have achieved things that were once thought to be impossible. From the Wright brothers' first flight to the space race to the development of smartphones, there have been countless examples of people pushing the boundaries of what is possible.

But what does all of this have to do with lifting each other up? Well, one of the most interesting things about these examples is how quickly achievements that were once thought to be impossible become commonplace. When Roger Bannister broke the 4-minute mile barrier, he opened up the floodgates for others to do the same. When Jim Hines broke the 10-second barrier in the 100-meter dash, it wasn't long before others followed suit.

This pattern shows that sometimes the biggest barrier to achieving something is our own belief that it can't be done. By setting aggressive goals and sticking to them, we lift each other up out of the pit of doubt and open up great possibilities. To make the most of these possibilities, we need to be daring, persistent, bold, and stay humble.

So let's challenge ourselves to set aggressive goals and work towards achieving them. Who knows what we might be capable of?

```
Original outline
- 4 minute mile
    - Was slated as impossible
    - Barrier finally broken by Roger Bannister in 1954
    - In the US alone
        - 1957: 1
        - 1960: 2
        - 1962: 5
        - 1963: 1
        - 1964: 5
        - 1965: 1
        - 1966: 5
        - ...
        - 2021 (JAN + FEB): 17
- 10 second barrier
    - Barrier borken by Jim Hines in 1968
    - in the 1970's: 1
    - In the 1980's: 7
    - In the 1990's: 23
    - In 2015: 12
- other examples
    - Flight
    - Spacerace
    - Smart phones
- Many achievements thought to be imposible has been done, only to be replicated many times right after
- Sometimes the most difficult thing about achiving something is convincing oneself that it can be done
- By setting aggresive goals and sticking to them we lift each other up from the pit of doubt and this opens up great possibilities
    - Be daring
    - Be persistent
    - Be bold
    - Stay humble

```